[Music]
Good day I'm Norman Wildberger we're on our way
towards investigating the difficulties with real
numbers as infinite decimals today we're going
to have some more practice thinking about issues
relating to repeating decimals but there's going
to be an interesting Twist from last time we're
going to introduce a rather novel approach
to something that's called pic numbers in
mathematics it's an interesting chapter of algebra
we're going to be looking at it from a very naive
but perhaps novel point of view and for those of
you with an interest in number Theory you're going
to find some really magical remarkable phenomena
happening here that you can investigate further
on your own so this video will introduce you to
a lovely new Arena of Investigation having to do
with an interesting Twist on repeating decimals so
let me review first of all the repeating decimal
story that we outlined last time uh fraction
like 17th or 1/3 can be expressed in terms of
a repeating decimal the bar over it means that
this 142857 is being repeated so we can think
of it if we as something that's going on and on
and on for a long time this pattern repeating
over and over again or if we like we can think of
just this expression finishing there with a bar
over it now last time we talked about addition
and multiplication and here's how you multiply
17th by 1/3 using decimal arithmetic the first
step would be to multiply say 17th by a simple
a three and because this goes on to towards the
right we can't start on the right hand Edge like
we would ordinarily do for finite decimals it's
a big difference so we have to start on the left
and we have to keep going in this direction but
modify as we go because of the carries that are
introduced at various stages so for example3 * 1
would be 3 why is this not a three well because
the 3 * 4 is 12 2 carry 1 makes that a four and
then 3 * 2 is 6 but the next one is 3 * 8 which
is 24 so there's a four there and carry the two
that makes the six and eight so we proceed in that
way probably best with a pencil and an eraser
writing down values and then rubbing them off
and adjusting them as we need to depending on
future carries that are going to come over and
spill over onto the number we've just written
down so once we've done that a little ways we
get to see that there's a pattern here there's a
428 571 then it repeats 428 571 now that's just
the first line of the multiplication table then
there's a second line which is just the whole
thing shifted over because we're just multiplying
by another three and then we have each of these
rows identical but all shifted over and this
pattern goes on just keeps on going we have to
add up all these rows to get the final answer
well we can't do that all at once so we adopt
the strategy that will sort of chop off at a
certain point and calculate up to that point
and then see what happens see if there's a pattern
so have a look here so there's four there we have
to add the two and the four that makes six why is
this not a six well because at the next row it's
8 + 2 + 4 is 14 so there' be a four there and
then we'd have to change the six into a seven
and then the four that we've just put there has
to be modified because then the next column we
get 5 + 8 + 2 that's 15+ four is 19 so there has
to be a nine there and then a one carrying but
that makes that a five not a 6 Y is it uh a six
well because the 19 that's there actually gets
affected by this one this one here is uh 12
20 26 so there's a six here and the two goes
over here to make that uh a 20 or 21 that makes
the 19 of 21 and then it gives you an extra one
there okay so as we keep on going the sums in each
of these columns gets bigger and bigger of course
and so those totals that we write down are going
to spill more and more over to the adjacent left
digits that we've just written so we in practice
we have to do a lot of rubbing out and uh and
rewriting as especially as we go on further and
further in this in this uh this infinite sort of
table well in fact what what happens is that in
this case there's a pattern that's established
reasonably early so there's 04761 9 and then 04
and then it turns out to repeat it's not visible
here because this is not really the the total uh
there's these further rows here that I haven't
written down which would also contribute to these
ones here so this is just a necessary awkwardness
that we get when we're doing arithmetic with
repeated decimals it's large unavoidable it
makes the subject hard to Define it makes it
hard for us to say precisely what the operations
are it makes it hard to actually perform the
operations and theoretically it makes it hard
to demonstrate that the usual laws of arithmetic
are valid for the operations that we've defined
in this way or that we could Define in this way
in any case the answer that we should get is of
course 1/ 21 and here's its repeated decimal
and that is what we would eventually get if we
did this a lot more we would eventually see this
um group of six being repeated but still that's
the point I made last time there's not really
a surprise that this topic is not treated more
extensively either at the high school or the
undergraduate level because it's a bit messy
and it's uh it's hard to get your hands really
on it firmly not impossible but not too easy
either so in this video we're going to have some
fun and do something which may seem completely
wild and crazy we're going to look at something
which I'm going to call reversals and these are
like decimals except that they're going to go
off to the left and they're going to carry on
to the left and keep on going and going for
as long as we have patience to write down and
the ones that we're going to be looking
at are repeating so these are repeating
reversals here's the one that starts 75 8241
and then repeats that and there's bar over it
means that you can think of it as being repeated
over and over again in that direction to the left
there well this is not a usual kind of number
so we're not doing ordinary arithmetic at all
here this is 7 this is 857 142,5 and there's
another 857 million and then 142 billion and
then 857 trillion we keep on adding more and
more and more as a number this just blows up
so it's not a number it's something else
it's some new kind of object but let's put
our doubts aside for the moment just have a
little bit of fun with these objects so here
is the one that we get uh by having the 17th
sequence repeated over and over again to the
left and here's 3333 now written going off to the
left and let's just for fun try to multiply these
things so for example our first row of the
multiplication would be this three * this big
number now this is a very different situation
from the last one because we are now starting
on the right hand side which is where we like to
start when we're doing Hindu Arabic arithmetic
so this multiplication is relatively simple 3 * 7
is 21 so we write down the one and we carry a two
and then 3 * 5 is 15 with a two is 17 so we write
down the seven and carry a one 3 * 8 is 24 with
the 1 makes 25 there's the five two is up there
3 * 2 is 6 + 2 is 8 3 * 4 is 12 and then we'll
carry the one 3 * 1 is 1+ 1 is 4 and then after
that it's just going to be repeat because we're
back to a seven again so we get this 1 75 824 and
then that's repeated that's repeated and we can
repeat it as many times as we like the second row
will be exactly the same thing but shifted over
by 10 so it's that's exactly the same row there
there and then the next one repeated again and
repeated there each one staggered one over to the
right and we have one of these rows for each one
of these numbers that we're multiplying by so
you can think of this very very very big table
lots of rows and going very far distance in this
direction now we have to add these things up but
again adding up is relatively a snap because
we're starting on the right hand side which
is the one we're used to 1 plus all these zeros
makes 1 7 + 1 is 8 5 + 7 + 1 is 13 so there's a
three and we carry the 1 now we have well 1 +
5 + 7 we just had that um 13 and now we add 8
which is 21 and 1 is 22 so there's a two and we
carry the two and then at the next step well we
we have uh again 13 + 8 is 21 and now we have
to add two and another two that's 25 there's
the five and the two and we carry on we at 1
8 3 25908 3 and at this stage here we've run
out of rows so to carry on further in a accurate
way I would need to extend this table and put in
some more rows so I can start adding up the uh
the further columns and if I did that I would
see that the answer that I'm going to get is this
one right here 1 and then 8 3 2 5 90 and then it
repeats so this is not um arithmetic with
repeating decimals it's not arithmetic with
ordinary numbers it's some kind of strange
arithmetic or actually the arithmetic is
not so strange but the objects that we're doing
arithmetic with we've probably never seen them
before there are some strange things that uh seem
very bizarre nevertheless this answer that we got
has a remarkable connection with the answer on
the previous slide when we multiplied 17th * 1/3
using ordinary repeating decimals so have a look
at these two expressions and see if you can see
what is the relationship between these two to get
some appreciation for what's going on here let's
go back to a famous perhaps notorious formula of
Oiler Oiler wrote down this equation and it's an
equation involving some variable X and here are
powers of X increasing so 1 + x + x^2 + x cubed
and so on keep on going and here are powers of
the reciprocal one /x 1x^2 1X cubed also keeping
on going in that direction and orer claims that
this is equal to zero now it's not so easy to
give a meaning to this in contemporary mathematics
but it's still a very interesting and ultimately
insightful identity that teaches us something so
I'm going to give it a name I'm going to call it
the dou infinite identity dii so it's not at
all clear what this formula actually means but
a justification is easy enough so Oiler would have
said well let's Express this thing call it a so a
is this sum a doubly infinite sum what happens
when we multiply a by X well this one goes to
that this one goes to that this one goes to that
while this one goes to that one this one goes goes
to that one this one goes to that one and so on
so when we multiply by X all of the terms just
shift over one to the left but since it's doubly
infinite here it means we're getting exactly the
same sum that we started with so a * x = a so
if we think of a as a number bring everything
to the same side we get a * X - 1 = 0 so if X
is not equal to 1 then a must be equal to zero
all this is a very strange argument I wouldn't say
at all that this is a rigorous argument okay this
is Oilers intuitive trying to get at something
that's out there but he doesn't quite know what it
is beautiful formula actually let's have a look
at how it applies to our situation so adopting
this adventurous Spirit of Oiler and in the spirit
of the formula that we just scow it down I claim
that this doubly infinite repeating decimal has to
equal zero it's the decimal that goes 37 37 37 and
so on in that direction and 37 37 37 and so on in
that direction why is it zero well we can think of
it as being 37 times this somewhat simpler decimal
1 .01 01 01 01 and so on and in this direction 0 1
01 if you multiply this by 37 then you get all
these 37s uh repeating on either side and this
thing here in the Hindu Arabic realization is well
that one represents one this one represents 100
the next one represents well 10,000 which is 100
squared the next one represents 100 cubed and so
on this one represents 1 over 100 this is 1
over 100 SAR 1 over 100 cubed so we get this
doubly infinite expression which Oilers formula
tells us is zero so 37 * 0 that's got to be
zero all right so this is very dubious
arithmetic but let's draw some consequences
if this made some sense then it would
mean that the part of the expression to
the right of the decimal point which is
37 37 37 repeating should be negative of
the part to the left which is 73 73
73 repeating in that direction with
a minus sign right because this plus this
equals zero so that means this equals minus
this or we could draw some other conclusions we
could chop this off in different different ways
we could say split it there and say this is
73737 repeated plus this thing here which is
0373 73 repeated so this has got to be
minus that or we could chop it off say
right here and say that this decimal to the
right there is 0 0073 repeated has got to be
minus what we get when we cover that up
which is 37 repeated on the left and 373
there these are all rather strange formulas
but they suggest that there's some kind of
link between the repeating decimals that we've
been talking about the ones that go off to the
right in the usual normal way and these strange
new objects that go off to the left and repeat as
we go off to the left so perhaps there's some kind
of arithmetic for these things which parallels and
corresponds to the arithmetic for these ones
so still keeping this attitude of fun and
not being too serious let's try to investigate
experimentally this arithmetic with repeating
reversibles and see does this actually perhaps
make some sense after after all is there some
structure here which is actually consistent and
perhaps even helps us to compute something let's
have a look so first we'll attach some names to
things let's say that we're going to be talking
about a repeating reversible so what's that it's
an expression of this form okay this is uh like
a Hindu Arabic number with a decimal point some
digits a finite number to the right of the decimal
point a certain number of digits to the left left
and then another number of digits which have a bar
over them okay so this object that's the kind
of object we'll be calling a a reversible but
it's actually a repeating reversible because the
the aspect of it in this direction is repeating
with that business there now in conventional
mathematics these kind of things are studied and
they have an official name so they're officially
called 10 adct numbers although in fact the 10
adct business doesn't happen too often usually
mathematicians that study in this area don't
work over base 10 they much prefer to work over
a prime base we might see the reason for that a
little bit later but 10 adct number is a little
bit of a mouthful revers sounds a little bit uh
cooler now just as for repeating decimals
we have to establish some conventions for
equality so we'll agree that if you have 37
bar like this then we can add another 37 like
that and put a bar over that that's the same
expression it really means 37 37 37 repeating
and we can get at that also by writing it
first as 7 and then 37 bar over it that's
exactly parallel to the kinds of conventions
that we have for repeating decimals and then
we have to have a convention about .9 repeated
that plays a special role in the base 10 story
well what should that be well according to
Oilers dii formula that should be minus .9
repeated as an ordinary repeating decimal which
is minus1 so 09 bar repeating to the left that's
going to be minus1 if we multiply it by 10 then 09
repeated like that is the same as - 10 and so on
so something like this so if we read to the left
7399 9999999 what is that well we can interpret
the 9999999 and so on as minus 100 exactly
parallel to these and then we still have 37
so - 100 + 37 is - 63 so this is going to be some
new and crazy way of writing down the number minus
63 arithmetic with reverse looks curious so
here are some examples of how we're going
to do addition with these repeating reversibles
first example we have two 2 4 8 repeated that's
just an ordinary 2 that's an ordinary 40 that's an
ordinary 800 and then add plus 8,000 plus 80,000
plus 800,000 Etc but we're just thinking of it
as an expression and here's the expression 2 4
88 we can put as many of these eights as
we want and we'll put a bar over the last
one plus say 27 bar which represents 2777 7 s
with a lot of sevens going that direction so
the addition takes place just like for regular
numbers we start on the right hand side and we
carry just as usual this is still the ones this
is still the tens this is still the hundreds
the thousands and so on it's just that now
there are well as many of them as we can write
down 2 + 2 is 4 4 + 7 is 11 8 + 7 is 15 +
the 1 is 16 it's a carry 8 + 7 is plus the
1 is 16 so it's a six and carry of one and then
another six and carry one and then another six
and carry one so it's clear that these sixes
are going to repeat and we're getting 41 6
repeated here's another example like that we
have something of period three and something
of period two so 734 734 734 and so on and 92 92
92 92 and so on let's see what happens here 7 + 9
is 16 there's a six carry 1 3 + 2 is 5 + 1 is 6 4
+ 9 is 13 carry the 1 7 + 2 + 1 is 10 carry the 1
3 + 9 + 1 is 13 carry the 1 4 + 2 6 carry the 1 7
and then 7 + 9 is 16 we're exactly back to where
we were started and the pattern of repetition
repeats because we've gone through a cycle of
six which is the lowest common multiple of three
and two so it's going to be obvious that at this
stage this whole pattern of six here repeats
so the answer is 73 0366 repeated okay here's a
another example 839 bar plus 76 bar there's uh 839
839 839 839 76 76 76 76 repeated notice that I'm
going to put the plus sign on this side that seems
more in the spirit of this kind of reversible
arithmetic all right so you can check my
computation I'm just adding as if this was
a big ordinary sum forgetting about the fact that
that keeps on repeating I just add exactly in the
ordinary way until I start seeing a pattern and
in this case again period of six and then I have
something repeated almost but it's a little bit
different from the previous one because in this
group of six here the eight and the Seven give
15 + 1 is 16 so there's a six and then one more
carry which means that this next one is not a
five as it was there but it's going to be a six
and in the next group that's going to happen
again there's going to be a one carry so the
next one will also be just like this one and not
like this one so it's this one that's going to be
repeated and then we look at it and see well
where's the first repetition it's actually 1
57066 that string is then being repeated so we
can rewrite the result more efficiently this way
and I'm going to leave you to check my arithmetic
here I'm just pointing out that we can also have
numbers that have some decimals extending to
the right of the decimal point so 257 repeated
257 257 257 to the left of the decimal and a 3
and 748 repeated 7 48 48 48 48 with a 0.1 at the
end 3 + .1 is4 and you can check my
arithmetic uh this is supposedly what we
get so the big thing here is that this is an
easier kind of addition of repeated things than
it is with repeated decimals and the reason is
because we're starting from the right which is
where we want to naturally start so as we go
move to the right we have to carry as usual
but we never have a situation where we write
something down and then later on go back and
have to rub it out and write something over it
once we've got a number it stays there so it's
much more like our usual arithmetic actually than
is the arithmetic with repeating decimals this
is a more familiar arithmetic actually even
though the objects are these wild and crazy
things it's getting more interesting in the same
way multiplication with these repeating reverses
is a lot easier than multiplication with repeating
decimals for the same reason that we get to start
on the right hand side and move to the left which
is what we naturally want to do so for example 47
repeated * 3 which is 47 47 47 47 and so on
* 3 well 3 * 7 is 21 there's the one there's
the carry of two 3 * 4 is 12 + 2 is 14 write down
the four carry the 1 3 * 7 is 21 + 1 is 22 write
down the two carry the two 3 * 4 is 12 + 2 is 14
there's the four carry the one and it's pretty
clear now that the pattern will be established
we're just going to get 1 4 2 with the 42
repeated here a more sophisticated example
we're multiplying 47 repeated with three
repeated so here are four sevens and so
on I should probably put a repeating over
here and the first line is just the one we've
already computed so it's 1 42 42 42 42 and so
on and then all the subsequent lines are just
exactly those ones shifted over one each time
and then when we add them all up well 1 is 1
4 + 1 is 5 2 + 4 + 1 is 7 4 + 2 + 4 + 1 is 11
there's the one carry a one and then 7 + 7 is
14 there's the four carrier one and so on by
the time we've gotten over here I think we can
see the pattern 57148 0 there's 57148 so it's
1 57148 0 it looks like that it's repeated if you
have a look at those computations that we've just
made and you make some yourselves which I
strongly recommend that you do try to add
some repeat competing reversibles and multiply
them one of the things that you will I think
appreciate is that the associative commutative
and distributive laws are almost obvious for
reversals they are not at all obvious for the
decimals going in this direction but when we go
this direction it's really just ordinary
arithmetic except that it happens to go
further than it usually does but if we look at
any particular string of it any initial string
that's really just like an ordinary addition
or multiplication and so it's almost obvious
that reversible arithmetic is going to satisfy
the usual laws of arithmetic at least when we're
talking about addition and multiplication
so theoretically there's a big difference
between these two here's another example of a big
difference between arithmetic with reversals and
decimals in reversible
arithmetic negatives are not
needed what do I mean by that well I mean
suppose for example that we have the reversal
127 bar which is 127 127 127 and carrying
on like this maybe I should put a bar over
it suppose we want to find its negative what
does that mean well it means another number
so that when we add it to it we get zero
now usually we would just write this number
and put a minus sign in front of it but the
point is that there's another expression in
the reversible world that acts as1 27 repeated
and I'm going to find it for you right now so
watch carefully we're going to find a number
that has the property that when we add it to
this one we get zero the first digit that we
want there is three because 7 + 3 is 0o well
actually it's 10 but zero with carry a one The
crucial thing is I've obtained a zero and now
I'm going to put a number here so that this
total also gives me a zero there what number
should this be well remember that we have to
include a carry of one so I'm going to put
a a seven here that way the 7 + 2 + 1 will be
10 so I'll get a zero here and then I'll put a
one here what I'm going to put here well I want
these two to add up to nine because I have this
one there already so I'm going to make this
an eight that'll make that zero add one and
then I'm back to the seven and it's going
to be three and then the next one seven and
then eight 3 8 7 repeated so what I see is that
minus1 127 bar is really the same thing as 873
bar that means we can in fact dispense with having
to introduce negative reversals for those of you
who have never liked negative numbers you might be
feeling better now there are no negative numbers
in this world or to put it another way the
the positive reversible the ordinary versal
include the negative numbers inside them just
like we saw that minus 63 or 64 that we had
earlier that was had an alternate form as a
ordinary reversible without a negative sign
in front of it what about a more complicated
one like this so 5486 repeated and then 1 2.8
so there's the 1 12.8 5486 5486 what's its
negative so we're looking for a number and
when we add it to this one we get zero it's
going to start with 0. 2 so that 82 is zero
carry the one and then we better put a seven
here making zero and then we better put an
eight here and then we better put a three here
and then a one here and then a five and then a
four and then a three and then a 1 and then a 5
and then a 4 and so on can we see the pattern 451
3 451 3 so the answer is 4513 87.2 with a 4513
repeated that's what negative this reversal is
it's very strange world of arithmetic this
reversible or Ted attic arithmetic now the
beauty of reversible arithmetic is that it's an
alternative form of arithmetic with fractions just
as is the arithmetic with repeating decimals so if
we have a fraction we can also convert it into a
repeating reversim and the most naive way of doing
that is this way let's say we have 17th and we
want to write it as a repeating reversible well
the first thing we could do is to write it as a
repeating decimal because that's completely clear
we know how to do that here is 17th as a repeating
decimal now this repeating decimal we can convert
it into a repeating reversible by using
the dou infinite identity of Oiler it's
going to be minus the same thing with the
repetition on the left hand side of the
decimal so this thing repeating on the
right of the decimal point is negative
the same thing repeating to the left
of the decimal point that's what Oiler
identity tells us so now we're in a position
of having to negate this thing well we know
how to negate this thing I showed you
just how to do it so there it is there
or more efficiently 3 4175 82 that's
just the negation of this thing as a
reversible on the other hand if we want to convert
a reversable to a fraction what we can do is this
so let's say we have 4493 repeated 8.1 okay
let's call it X so here it is a little bit
more expanded 8.1 1 then 493 493 so we want to
do the same kind of thing that we do to convert
a decimal to a fraction we look at this thing
and say all right let's multiply it by suitable
power of 10 actually let's start with this one
let's just multiply it by 10 if we multiply it
by 10 then that decimal moves to the to the
right of all the digits and then we have just
some something with zeros to the to the right of
the decimal point okay that's good and now what
we're going to do is we're going to multiply
by 10,000 multiplying by 10,000 of X moves
the decimal point over four because there's four
zeros in 10,000 so instead of being here it gets
moved over once twice three times four times or
from here it goes one 2 3 4 it's over there now
and at this stage the the repeating parts are
lined up the 394 repeated the 3 94 repeated
they're all lined up above each other so if
we take the difference between these things
we would get 9,990 x equal this minus this which
would be 9 1 6 uh 1 3 so Al together X is 3,619 /
9,990 so it's very similar to the
way we go from a decimal repeating
decimal to a fraction here is a
more direct way of going from a
fraction to a repeating reversal which
does not go through the the repeating
decimal let's have another look at 17th now 7 is
a little bit special well not that special but it
has the property that it's relatively prime
to 10 that makes this analysis a little bit
easier than if seven was a number like eight or
a number that had a factor two or five in it okay
so one of the properties of seven because it's
relatively prime to 10 is that if you look at
the numbers from 0 to 9 and you multiply them
all by seven and then look at the ones digits
then you get the numbers from 0 to 9 again in
some New Order so what I'm talking about here
is 7 * 0 is 0 7 * 1 is 7 7 * 2 is 14 so we just
ignore everything except for the 1 we'd get 4
7 * 3 is 21 so there's a 1 7 * 4 is 28 eight and
so on so in number Theory this is called mod 10
arithmetic but all what we're going to need here
is that this is a a pairing between the numbers
from 0 to 9 to the numbers from 0 to 9 with some
uh permutation okay so what do we want to do we
want to find one divid 7 that means we want to
find a number that has the property that when
you multiply it by seven you get one so here's the
mystery number that I'm going to find okay this is
going to be 17th along here and I've just started
finding it I've started with a three because from
this list I can see that if I want to get a
one I have to multiply 7 by 3 so 3 * 7 is 21
and I've written down the one and I've carried
a two okay the next thing that I'm supposed to
get is zero because I want this product it to
be one and all the rest zeros so how am going
to arrange this to be zero there's already a two
here so that means the rest of the number has to
be eight so that 2 + 8 is zero carry one so how
am I going to get an eight I'm going to get an
eight by multiplying by four so 4 * 7 is 28 carry
the two is 30 so there a zero and I have to carry
a three and now I have to get a seven here to add
up with this three to get zero so how am I going
to get a seven I look here and I'm going to have
to have a one so 7 * 1 is 7 + 3 is 10 there's a
zero carry a 1 okay now I'm going to need a nine
to get that zero and I need to multip mly by 7
so I'll put a seven there 7 * 7 is 49 + 1 is 50
there's the zero carry the five 5 + 5 is 10 how
am I going to get a five by multiplying by five 7
* 5 is 35 + 5 is 40 carry a four now I want a six
how am I going to get a six by multiplying by
8 8 * 7 is 56 + 4 is 60 there's a zero carry a
6 six I'm going to have to add a a four what am
I going to have to put there I'm going to have
to put a uh 2 2 * 7 is 14 + 6 is 20 there's a z
carry a two oh now we're at the same stage that
we already were so it's going to be then a four
4 and then a 1 and then a seven and so on and
so the answer is that 17th equals reading here 3
4175 8 2 417 repeated so it's 2 8 5 7 1 4 3 all
of that repeated and that's the same number that
we got uh on the previous slide all right so very
good that's a kind of light not very rigorous
introduction to the arithmetic with reversals
how about some exercises so you can play around
with these things so the first exercise is just to
explain why the usual laws of arithmetic hold for
addition and multiplication for reversibles and
now it's important to check that this arithmetic
be something that's consistent and the best way of
doing that is to compute some things in different
ways to make sure that we get the same thing so we
can check that things are actually consistent so
this is only one of many possible examples that
you can try out use reversible arithmetic to
check that say 2/3 * 17th + 1/4 is the same as
2/3 * 1 7th + 2/3 * 1/4 in other words convert
each of these to a repeating reversible and
then calculate the left hand side using reversal
arithmetic calculate the right hand side using the
same and hopefully they should agree and then you
can do the same variant try different numbers try
different laws just play around with arithmetic in
various ways check out the laws that they actually
work so that this is uh consistent at our last
exercise is to make a careful comparison between
two calculations one in the repeating decimal
framework one in the repeating reversal framework
and they're pretty close to being the same
computations we're going to go back to that 1 9th
* 1 9th where the Expressions involved are pretty
simple. 11111 repeated time 0.1111 repeated or
on the reversal side the negative giv - 1 9th - 1
9th are11 1111 repeated that direction time 0.1111
repeated in that direction now we've already seen
that when you do this well it's very very simple
uh to set it up and when we add the various rows
that appear in this big expression we're going to
get zero as a total in the First Column then one
as the total in the second column and then two and
then 3 and then four 5 6 7 8 9 and then the 10th
column or maybe it's the 11th column will have a
total of 10 that's before we do any carrying and
then total of 11 total of 12 and so on so let me
remind you that what you have to do at that point
to convert it into a decimal is you have to do the
carries so this 10 well you have to leave the
zero there and move the 10 to make add one to
this one then this 11 you leave the one there
and you add one to that total and you have to
do that all the way through and often once you've
added something to some box well then you have to
modify the the one following it as well so this
has continual cascading effect that further ones
to the right are going to start affecting the ones
that you've already done and we've had a look at
this calculation and this is the re uh de deal
that you get and now over on this side everything
is much simpler this is like a mirror but this
mirror is asymmetric everything looks 10 years
younger with no wrinkles on this side so here the
addition is very straightforward 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
10 11 and so on just as before but now the carries
are to the right crucial difference and so it's
immedi or almost immediate to write down what the
repeating expression is once you've gone a certain
ways but even in both cases it's still it's
still uh not at all clear why perhaps you
get a repeating object out of this in fact you
could think about it this way this is a game you
could play which is completely independent of
reversals or decimals if you just gave someone
a whole bunch of boxes with the numbers 0 1 2
3 4 5 6 and so on in it carrying on let's say
to a billion and then you said okay the game is
going to be you're going to have to convert this
into a Hindu Arabic number by whenever you
have more than nine in a box you've got to
convert 10 of them into the next unit and move
the 10 replace the 10 with one of the next unit
over to the left that's effectively doing the
carrying why should it be that what you get
is why should it be that what you get is repeating
and why is it exactly this one and then you can
ask the exactly the same question in this form
where the question is now different because again
the numbers are going in this direction but the
carries are still going in the in to the left so
so again the question is why does this game that
just starts out with these this long row of boxes
with numbers in them why does it end up giving
you something that's repeating and what is it
that you end up getting after you you make the
calculation of course these numbers are the same
okay because we're we're getting 1 over 81 in both
cases this is the repeating decimal version of 1
over 81 this is the repeating reverse imal of 1
81 but this calculation was a lot simpler than
this one so although this whole thing may seem
like some crazy game yet there's this magical
outcome this magical payoff that if you actually
had to do a lot of calculations with repeating
decimals using repeating decimal arithmetic you
would very much value knowing that you could
change things from here to here to go through
the mirror to this strange Allison wonderline
kind of situation where the calculations are
so much simpler and then go back so purely as a
computational tool this is a very interesting and
Powerful device especially if you're working with
patterns that have that are big lots of repetition
lots of carries and so on this becomes dramatic
simpler this is a a remarkable thing and um I
think it deserves a lot more press so I think
that the people who are studying pic arithmetic
perhaps don't advertise this aspect of their
subject perhaps as well as uh they might I think
it deserves some press and here is a major project
for those of you who are interested in this and
who have a number theoretical back background or
an interest so when I say major project this
is like a a year-long project for a retired
person or perhaps a master student or an advanced
undergraduate so the the challenge is to go over
this this lecture that I've just done and to lay
out careful definitions of arithmetic with these
repeating reversals so write down carefully what
exactly is the repeating reversible what exactly
are the def of arithmetic and prove that this
actually is a consistent business and that it
actually recovers the rational number arithmetic
that we get something that's isomorphic to the
rational number arithmetic in this repeating
reversible sense so we might introduce a new
type there we've already seen that this is the
same as the repeating decimals but that this is
another connection between rational numbers and
decimals in a rather interesting and different
direction so this whole discussion is hopefully
getting you a little bit more familiar with
actually doing arithmetic with decimals that
are not necessarily finite and next time we're
going to take the step to so-called infinite
decimals so it's time now that I set out what
what are the difficulties when you try to
develop the theory of real numbers using
infinite decimals I claim that that doesn't
really work and next time I'm going to spell
out why it doesn't work and you'll see that the
reasons are not particularly sophisticated ones
the argument is not particularly elaborate it's
just a consequence of laying out the definitions
carefully and having a good look at them and I
think you'll all agree you'll all be able to see
that there are serious difficulties it's hard
to not acknowledge it once it's been laid out
very clearly so that we know exactly what we're
talking about that's what we're going to do or try
to do next time I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman wildberger thanks for [Music] listening a